1. Ansible :-  Ansible is an open-source automation tool used for configuration management, application deployment, orchestration, and IT automation. 
It allows you to manage multiple servers efficiently without needing to install an agent on each machine.

Key Features of Ansible :-

1) It is agentless because unlike puppet and chef, it doesn't need any agent installation on nodes. It uses SSH or WinRM (windows) for communication. 

2) It uses YAML (Yet anonther machine language) which is an human readable format for writing playbooks. It is simple and easy to learn

3) It makes sures that running the same playbook multiple times does not cause unintended changes.

4) It uses modules, roles, and collections to extend its capabilities.

Advantages of using Ansible :

1) Easy to Learn & Use
2) Scalable & Flexible
3) No Need for Agents
4) Large Community Support


2. Ansible components :- Ansible uses serveral concepts to automate the daily repetitive tasks to minimize the time taken.

Inventory:- A file that lists the hosts (managed nodes) Ansible will manage.
Default location: /etc/ansible/host

Modules:- It is used to perform tasks like installing packages and manage services.

Examples: apt, yum, service, copy, user, file, templates etc.

Playbooks:- YAML files containing a set of tasks that define what should be done on managed nodes.

Tasks:- Individual units of work within a playbook. Each task calls a module.

Handlers:- Special tasks that only run if notified by another task/ Modified the source code. Typically used for restarting services.

Roles:- A structured way to organize playbooks which includes tasks, variables, templates, and handlers.

Variables:- Used to make playbooks more dynamic. 

Templates:- Jinja2 template files that use variables dynamically.

Facts:- System-related variables gathered from managed nodes automatically.

Plugins:- Extend Ansible’s functionality.
Types: Lookup, Filter, Connection, Callback, Inventory, Strategy Plugins.


3. Ansible Commands

1) Run a playbook:
2) ansible-playbook site.yml
3) Run an ad-hoc command:
4) ansible all -m ping
5) Run a playbook with extra variables:
6) ansible-playbook site.yml --extra-vars "user=admin"


4. Advanced Concepts

Ansible Vault (Encrypt sensitive data like passwords)

ansible-vault encrypt secrets.yml
ansible-vault decrypt secrets.yml

Ansible Tower / AWX (UI-based automation platform for enterprise use)

Dynamic Inventory (Integration with cloud services like AWS, GCP)
